# Setting the context

The history of Africa is certainly long and varied, and the intention here is certainly not to rehash it all, so it's important to define the scope. For our discussion, the history to reexamine will be the scramble for African, its eventual colonization, and the death traps left behind to keep the tax coffers open for pillaging under the auspices of colonialist puppets.

## Whiteness and colonization

The notion of "white" people and "whiteness" in general has evolved over the years. This concept however did not occur until 1613 when the English society first encountered and contrasted themselves against the East Indians through their colonial pursuits. Even then, there was not a large body of people who considered themselves "white" as we know the term today. From about the 1550s to 1600, "white" was exclusively used to describe elite English women, because the whiteness of skin signaled that they were persons of a high social class who did not go outside to labor. However, the term white did not refer to elite English men because the idea that men did not leave their homes to work could signal that they were lazy, sick, or unproductive. Initially, the racial identity of "white" referred only to Anglo-Saxon people and has changed due to time and geography. As the concept of being white evolved, the number of people considered white would grow as people wanted to push back against the increasing numbers of people of color, due to emancipation and immigration. Activist Paul Kivel says, "Whiteness is a constantly shifting boundary separating those who are entitled to have certain privileges from those whose exploitation and vulnerability to violence is justified by their not being white."

The notion of "black" people was coined in the context of slave trade to justify the practise, since the black person was regarded to as subhuman. European colonists' use of the word "white" to refer to people who looked like themselves, grew to become entangled with the word "race" and "slave" in the American colonies in the mid-1660s. These elites created "races" of "savage" Indians, "subhuman" Africans, and "white" men. The social inventions succeeded in uniting the white colonists, dispossessing and marginalizing native people, and permanently enslaving most African-descended people for generations.

Starting in the 15th century, when European powers initiated contact and commercial activity with Sub-Saharan Africa, and continuing throughout the following centuries, organized religion played a leading role in developing, supporting, and legislating the Transatlantic Slave Trade. The Roman Catholic Church was critical to the efforts of global expansion by Portugal, Spain, and France and the creation of massive commercial enterprises built on the suffering and death of enslaved people. In 1452 and 1455, Pope Nicholas V formally supported Spain and Portugal's mass kidnapping and enslavement of Africans because it would help to Christianize enslaved people.

In 1548, Pope Paul III used his ["apostolic authority"](https://ldhi.library.cofc.edu/exhibits/show/african_laborers_for_a_new_emp/pope_nicolas_v_and_the_portugu) to declare the slave trade legal in the eyes of the church, which empowered the religious monarchies in European nations to continue to engage in Transatlantic trafficking. The "popes and their friends" accepted "gifts" of enslaved Black people shipped from Africa to Rome. 

## Religion trap

When European explorers reached the East African inland and met the indigenous people, and their communication was most likely done with the help of interpretors and perhaps initially relied heavily on bodily expressions. It is believed that the explorers brought with them diseases from Europe which they had weaponized to infect the indigenoues people. This theory is not far fetched, and is supported by the horror stories of the Spanish inquisition in the Americas, using diseases to wipe out the indigenous population. With the East African indigenous people not having peviously developed any immunity against these foreign diseaeses, they unsurprisingly dropped like flies, and this created the perfect opportunity to introduce foreign gods and foreign religions to the disease-raved and hope-deprived Africans. I can only image how it must have went, something like this:

> You are without hope and lost without our god. You need to reject your gods and accept ours, and pray to our god for healing. When you do so, and then take this portion of a drink, your disease shall be miraculously cured. All you just have to do is simply believe it with all your heart and all your might. The best reward however will only come after you die. You will be brought back to life again in a spiritual body, and live in a big mansion built just for you in the skies in close proximity to our god. In the meantime, while you are alive, you shall not want anything. You shall give up all your earthly possessions and only live to praise our god. If you need anything while you are alive, just ask our god for it, and keep believing insistently that it will be provided to you. If your prayers are taking long to be answered, you must have done something wrong or are not praying right. Just repent, pray harder, give up more of your wealth, and faithfully keep waiting, because faith is believing in thing not yet seen.

And voila! The medicine did it's job, the disease got cured, the illiterate brain was completely hooked, and the miracle story was set to spread like wildfire - that there was no better or more powerful god than the white god. And just like that, the African got caught up in a viscious cycle of perpetual hell on earth.

## Education trap

The East African indigenous people certainly had the life skills necessary to lead quiet and normal lives as hunters and gatherers, in peace and harmony with their neighbors, and trading their goods to acquire products and services they did not have. Life was good, but there was no formal education, as we know it today. Their scope of trading activities was also not wide and the concept of a central bank currency was never heard of before. Because of illiteracy, record keeping, reading or even the art of written communication was not an known concept. It was all so magical to the natives, and so acquring such skills elevated someone into another realm of human super powers. To get this education however, one had to abandon their religion for the white religion known as christianity, and accept the white god of europeans as their new god. This white god is mostly depicted in pictures and images having a pale skin, blue eyes and long, blond hair in western european sources, but the same god is also depicted having a pale skin, brown eyes and a darker shade of hair in eastern european source. This white god is commonly known as __jesus__, who is also described as one part of the trinity of an ancient god, who happens to be the same canaanite god known as __El__.

## Economic trap

Can anyone guess why the __Ksh 20__ note goes by the same __mbao__ in Kenyan slang? Well, here's the story. After WWII, the [Bretton Woods agreement](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/brettonwoodsagreement.asp) forced Allied countries to accept the U.S. dollar as a reserve rather than gold, and the U.S. government pledged to keep enough gold to back its dollars. The gold standard is a fixed monetary regime under which the government's currency is fixed and may be freely converted into gold. Under the Bretton Woods system, gold was the basis for the U.S. dollar, and other currencies were pegged to the U.S. dollar’s value. In 1971 however, the Nixon administration terminated the convertibility of U.S. dollars to gold, creating a fiat currency regime, and the fixed exchage rates regime was effectively ended. In the 60s, after Kenya's independence, and into the early 70s, the kenyan shilling exchanged at a fixed rate of ksh 20 for a sterling pound. It was a very convenient measure of value and wealth and an invaluable metric for making economic sense. To the __kikuyu__ people, pronouncing __pound__ did not come naturally. A few gramatical rules in the kikuyu language contributed to the wild pronounciation of __pound__. First, although the kikuyu language has words containing the letters "nd" and "mb", the "n" and "m" are always silent. For example, "mbura" which mean *rain*, is pronounced as *bura*. Meanwhile, something like *ndore* which means *a fart* is pronounced *dore*. Another gramatical rule is that words in Kikuyu never end with a consonant sound. There has to be a vowel sound. Another gramatical rule is that kikuyu does not have a sound for the letter *p*. Anything with *p* if pronouced with the sound of letter *f*. The *sterling* in *sterling pound* had to be dropped for the sake of simplicity. So for the phrase *sterling pound*, the only way it would have been pronounced was either *fa-oh-di* or simply *fa-oh*. In kikuyu expressions, it is common to prefix a noun with *ki* to add a sense of enigma or larger size. But *ki* is also commonly exchangibly with *gi* in certain situations. So the *pound* eventually became known as *gifao*. The Kikuyu language contains seven vowel sounds unlike the five vowel sounds present in swahili. So *gifao* is pronounced more like *ghay-fa-o*. In kikuyu, the word for *wood* is __mbao__, and because wood can also be pronouced in casual conversations as *row-fa-oh* or *ghay-fa-oh*, the similarity between wood and sterling __pound__ is hard to miss. Eventually, the swahili word for wood, __mbao__ remains the slang word for ksh 20.

Anyway, back to colonization. The system of trade before the colonizers was primarily bartering, where groups exchanged good and services in the open market, and the exchange value was determined at the point of contact. There was no predertmined basis for ascertaining or transfering value, and therefore most trade was done amicably based on trust and degree of need. Trade was predominantly done for the wellbeing and continuity of the community, and not primarily for making a profit. The element of human greed, although always lurcking around waiting to exploit, didn't have a chance to flourish under the traditional economic system. But then the colonizers come with a new system that required splitting the communities into using administrative boundaries, forcing people into designated camps, turning fields of land into commercial plantations for producing export crops, collecting taxes, registering people, issuing IDs, requiring forced labour in the plantations in exchange for meager pay, and requiring use of legal tender as the primary means for conducting business. The African social structure was completely annihilated. The reaction from the indigenous people was virtually inexistent. The poison of religion was coursing through their veins, and it was hard to fight back against the person who looked like the picture of the new god hanging in their living rooms. The lack of willpower to push back against the onslought of the colonizer's cultural takeover led to the crumbling of the African's social structure, and so the colonizer's social structures were adopted by the educated black elites and the effect tricked down slowly but surely to the liiterate locals at the bottom of the food chain.

## The trifecta

The three-pronged attack was not in full force.